# Internationalization

There are two categories of logs:

1. **Technical Logs** generated using the [Logrus](https://github.com/sirupsen/logrus) Golang library. This topic is
   treated in [logging.md](logging.md).
2. **User Logs** that are shown to the end user, and thus have to be internationalized. This is the topic of this document.

The next sections describes how classes that can later be used to generate **User Logs** are generated based on
configuration files.

## User Log

For logging user-readable messages we use the [rfc5424logger](https://dev.azure.com/kuka/RoX%20OS/_git/os_core_go_common?path=/rfc5424logger)
which takes care of formatting logs correctly. The sent messages to this log must however be translated.

For this we adhere to the [KUKA Internationalization Guide](https://kuka.visualstudio.com/RoX%20OS/_git/rox_architecture?path=/internationalization/developer-guide.md&_a=preview) which refers to the KXR

There are 2 different mechanisms to deal with:

1. Messages which are sent to syslog defined by `i18n/messages.xml`
2. General localizable texts (currently only used for log titles) in `i18n/operation_management_updateAgent.en.json`

### Message code generation

Message constructors are generated from `i18n/messages.xml` to `internal/adapter/userlog/messages/messages.go` by 
calling `make messages` (uses KUKA OCI image for generation with Podman, so run inside vagrant).

This functions (e.g. `CreateInstallStarted`) defined in `messages.go` can then be used to generate **User Logs**.

> Messages which are logged by `userlog` may only be generated!

### Pipeline integration

To generate and upload KXR files for the i18n infrastructure we adapted our pipeline with additional steps for 
generation and upload of KXR files.

See `pipelines/azure-pipeline_operation_management_update_agent.yml` under `# KXR generation`.

## Glossary

### KXR

KXR or kxr is a format for message texts used in the KSS.  KXRs are used for translation messages inside KUKA software.
The files have the *.kxr ending.

For more details have a look at [KXR](https://wiki.rd.kuka.com/devwiki/KXR)